male narrator: At the top of
The world...
[beeping]
[horn honks]
There's a job only a few would
Dare.
Last season, the dash for the
Cash was fought on the smooth
Playing field of canada's arctic
Ice.
This season, two old pros...
alex: I came for the cash.
narrator: Join four of
America's bravest truckers...
jack: Come on, boys, saddle
Up.
Let's go.
narrator: To tackle the
Continent's deadliest ice
Passage.
Just when you thought extreme
Trucking couldn't get more
Dangerous...
george: Most dangerous road
I've ever been on.
hugh: They say she's a
Treacherous one.
So I'm here to give her a shot.
narrator: Ice road truckers
Take on alaska.
[aerosmith's living on the edge]
These are the truckers who make
Their living on thin ice.
♪ we're living on the edge ♪
♪ you can't help yourself ♪
♪ living on the edge ♪
♪ from falling ♪
narrator: Prudhoe bay, alaska
On the arctic ocean holds the
Mother lode of the 21st century:
Oil pumped by the billions of
Gallons down the trans-alaskan
Pipeline to supply america's
Increasing demand for energy.
jack: The oil business is
Obviously the bread and butter
Of the state.
george: It's the lifeblood of
The state of alaska.
narrator: But there's only
One road to these ridges.
And it's the most fearsome on
The planet.
This is the unpaved, ice-coated
Track called the dalton, better
Known as the haul road.
It's an ice road of a deadlier
Breed where trucks smash head-on
Or fly off instead of breaking
Through, averaging a dead man
For almost every one of its 414
Miles.
george:T's dangerous.
There's no two ways about it.
There's a lot of trucks that's
Upside-down up there to prove
It.
jack: It's curve after curve
After uphill, downhill, curve.
Crazy.
narrator: For an ice road
Trucker, this road is the
Ultimate challenge, because
Every mile through the alaskan
Wilderness is met with a new and
Unpredictable threat.
The gauntlet of terror begins
With a brutal initiation: 56
Miles of icy hills and srp
Curves.
There's a white knuckle stretch
Called the rollercoaster and a
Hairpin turn whose name says it
All.
george: Oh, [bleep] corner.
[laughs]
Oh, [bleep].
narrator: 250 miles in, the
Most feared enemy... the road:
4,700-foottigun pass where
Avalanches strike at any moment
And bury truckers alive.
tim: You can freeze to death
Out there in half an hour.
narrator: The final assault:
50 miles of windswept ice called
The bluffs where temperatures
Dive to 70 below and the road
Can suddenly vanish in a total
Whiteout.
tim: Can't see a [bleep]
Thing.
narrator: And if the ice on
The dalton road doesn't kill
You, the final stretch over the
Arctic ocean just might.
tim: They say it's not if you
Wreck, it's when you wreck.
jack: You could easily die
Out there.
narrator: The ice road
Truckers' mission: To haul more
Than 6,000 loads from fairbanks
To deadhorse, the gateway to
The prudhoe bay oil fields.
And they have just 12 weeks to
Do it in.
It's such a deadly route that
They earn the equivalent of
Combat pay...$120,000 and up.
The more loads, the more cash.
george: That's the
Highest-paying job there is.
They don't pay us this good
Because it's easy.
The girl scouts are not up there
Doing it.
narrator: 24 hours before
The winter season begins,
Northern lights flare in the
Sky.
The ragged thunder of diesel
Engines builds in the yard,
But the trucks are at a
Standstill, waiting for the
Last mile of ice road to be
Built.
time to go make an ice road.
narrator: The dalton is paved
With ice because big rigs
Require a smooth driving
Surface, and no other material
Can hold up to the extreme
Conditions.
An 8,500-gallon tanker unloads
Water onto the roadbed.
one mile of road, and we
Basically lay down 32,000
Gallons of water per mile.
narrator: And then a grader
Does a pass over the
Fast-freezing slush.
we raise this road surface
Almost 2 inches.
This here is 2 inches of ice
Exactly.
narrator: But the tradeoff
For an even surface of ice is
A road that can turn as slick
As a skating rink.
The trek north begins in the
City of fairbanks.
Here in the yards of carlile
Transportation systems,
Thousands of loads are piling
Up.
The blue trucks of carlile are
One of the most familiar sights
In the far north.
They move a third of the freight
That goes up the dalton and over
The ice.
it's a challenging,
Dangerous road, and our goal in
Our company is to run it 100%
Safely.
We just got a really big season
Going on this winter.
It's the busiest one we've had
For about ten years, probably,
This winter.
narrator: With so much
Freight to move, dispatchers
Send out the word: Drivers
Wanted.
we're just swamped with
Business.
We just don't have enough
Drivers right now to get on the
Road.
We're basically looking for
Anyone that's capable of running
The dalton.
We've got a couple leads on
Bringing some drivers out of
Canada right now that are gonna
Help us.
narrator: Across town in
Fairbanks, the canadian invasion
Has already begun.
hugh: Yee-haw.
Fairbanks, alaska.
Dalton highway, here I come.
narrator: Hugh "the polar
Bear" rowland has conquered just
About every ice road in canada.
Now he's on the prowl stateside.
hugh: Everybody knows polar
Bears have the right of way.
narrator: And he's not alone.
alex: Good morning,
Fairbanks, alaska.
Looks like it's gonna be a nice
Morning.
All I need is a truck and a
Load, a map, and the dalton.
Lord, go with me.
narrator: Alex and hugh have
A combined 60 years' experience
As ice road truckers.
But they've never seen anything
Like the extreme hills and
Curves of the dalton.
They know the legend.
Now they're here to drive it.
hugh: You spin out on one of
These hills, and she's a long
Way to the bottom, and you're
Upside-down by the time you get
There, that's for sure.
narrator: Finally, opening
Day of the ice road season.
[engine rumbles]
The 500-mile race to the oil
Fields is on.
[horn honks]
One of carlile's top drivers,
Jack jessee, is chosen tmove
The first heavy load of the
Season.
In alaska there are truck
Drivers, and then there are
Heavy haulers who move anything
Oversized or overweight.
jack: They put it on the
Trailer, they tell me to get it
There safely, I get it there.
narrator: 20 feet long, 18
Feet high, the massive modular,
Or mod, is a structure used to
House heavy equipment.
This load will hang so far into
The oncoming lane that it's at
High risk for a head-on
Collision.
To run interference, jack
Commands a small fleet of three
Pilot cars.
jack: There's gonna be some
Spots where I'm really gonna
Have to slow down.
To go through some of the things
Like this.
The lolololololoload...it'll be s
Of...All kinds of weird stuff.
narrator: Jack's convoy is
First out of the gate.
Priority: Critical.
you know, a heavy haul driver
Has a lot more responsibility.
They may have a module worth
$10-12 million, and a lot of
Times there might be a work crew
Of maybe 20 or 30 guys waiting
On that to show up.
narrator: The mod has to
Reach an oil rig in less than
48 hours to keep production on
Schedule.
The express mission will take
Jack over 414 miles of steep
Mountain ice.
And if that doesn't take him
Down, he'll face the final
Stretch over a frozen arctic
Ocean.
Virginia-born, college-educated,
Jack found his calling on the
Haul road.
it's a freedom thing, you
Know.
An easy rider, get on the
Motorcycle and go.
You're just doing it in a truck.
When you're driving a truck, it
Kinda gets into your blood.
You hate it sometimes, and
Sometimes you just love it to
Death.
narrator: Now that he's at
The very top of the game, he
Aims to stay there.
jack: My goal for this year
Is to survive the year, make a
Living for my family, be around
To do it next year, and keep
Doing it.
I'm doing a job that I love to
Do.
narrator: 70 miles north of
Fairbanks, the pavement drops
Off, and the solid ice of the
Haul road begins.
The road narrows.
Jack's pilot car drivers begin
Their vigilant watch for
Oncoming traffic.
there's a pretty high level
Of trust going on with the pilot
Cars.
You know, I mean, they're my
Eyes, my ears, out ahead of me.
'cause there's spots that I
Can't meet anybody.
narrator: Almost immediately
The great ascent begins.
Jack hits the first hill of the
Trip, called "2,5 mile", with
A steep grade of 8 degrees.
To climb it, a heavy hauler
Needs plenty of momentum, but
Not so much speed that he can't
Stop.
jack: When you're that heavy,
It takes a long distance to
Stop.
It's like a train.
narrator: Jack slowly inches
His way to the top.
Tires holding on the ice.
But this is just the first of
Many hurdles.
The monstrous rollercoaster is
Dead ahead.
Back at carlile, the american
Veteran of the ice rolls in to
Begin his 30th and final year on
The road.
George spears started driving
The haul road because it's the
Closest thing he could find to
Combat.
george: Veterans like myself
Seek out something that's
Dangerous.
Something that's right on the
Edge like that.
People ask what's worse, to
Crash into another truck or go
Off a cliff?
I'd just as soon not do either
One of 'em.
narrator: In fact, he's done
Both, including flipping his
Truck over a cliff.
george: Boom, boom, boom,
Went bounding over the hill.
Rolled over twice.
I walked out the windshield.
It happens real fast up there.
I don't care how good a driver
You are or what, if you don't
Have a good respect for that
Road, sooner or later, it'll
Reach out and grab ya.
narrator: The list of fallen
Drivers is long.
At the last truck stop before
The dalton begins stands a
Memorial.
And many of george's friends'
Names are on the wall.
george: There's my good
Friend, dale harris.
We called him spud.
He was just an outgoing guy.
He was just a lot of fun to be
Around, and he's been sorely
Missed.
narrator: It was st last
Winter that dale was driving
South on a long, winding hill.
He was only 60 miles from home
Rounding a blind curve when
Headlights stabbed the darkness
Ahead.
This is the haul road's greatest
Danger: Two big rigs meeting
Suddenly on a narrow stretch
Of ice.
The oncoming truck, loaded with
Cement, jackknifed as it
Approached.
The heavy trailer drifted into
Dale's lane.
[crash]
it was an accident.
It was an accident.
It was a trucker's worst
Nightmare on both sides.
george: See, he was about my
Age, he was about ready to
Retire, same as I am, so...
A shame to go that long and
Then not make it.
narrator: Fairbanks, alaska,
January 20th...opening day of
The ice road season.
And day one on the job for haul
Road rookie, tim freeman.
tim: I'm a little nervous.
Well, I've listened to people
Talk about the dalton all my
Life.
narrator: A fourth-generation
Driver from minnesota, tim is
Here for trucking's ultimate
Challenge...
And biggest payday.
tim: Make some of that money.
[laughs]
I just feel confident because
I was trained by my father,
Who's been around trucks 51
Years he's been alive.
I taught tim how to drive.
I'd say anybody that starts out
Running that road's under
Pressure.
The minute you're not nervous up
There, you better start looking
For something else to do, is the
Way I look at it.
narrator: Before tim senior
Sent his son to the ice roads,
He enlisted an old friend as his
Mentor.
tim jr.: Scrap-iron georgie
Spears.
George is a good family friend.
He's a case too.
I love that guy.
narrator: But the haul road
Breaks rookie drivers.
tim jr.: [bleep].
This is bad.
narrator: And if tim's going
To succeed on this road, he's
Got to show something special.
tim jr.: There is no
Guarantee.
All I can do is hope.
I'm ready to go trucking, man.
narrator: Over in the carlile
Shop, tim's truck is being
Refitted with a set of arctic
Armor.
It's the first and essential
Step to surviving the punishing
Road ahead.
jarid: These trucks have what
What you would call an arctic
Package from the factory.
But their version of arctic and
Our version of arctic up here
Are two different things.
We're gonna start off wrapping
These lines here so that we can
Keep this power steering warm.
The cold that we deal with up
Here...you probably don't see 60
Or 70 below down in the states.
narrator: In this kind of
Cold, just about every fluid
Could freeze solid.
jarid: Once you get up there
In that wind and that cold
Weather, you can't steer this
Truck.
The fluid becomes so thick that
It will not turn.
narrator: If brakes aren't
Protected from the elements,
They can lock up without
Warning.
jarid: They pack up with ice.
Well, then you go to step on
Your brakes and you don't have
Brakes.
narrator: Jarid rebuilds the
Brake assembly with heavy-duty
Bushings to prevent ice from
Building up inside.
Weather-beaten batteries need
Replacing...
And finally, the engine needs
Protecting.
jarid: This will actually
Keep the truck warm so that the
Driver is not freezing to death
While he's driving down the
Road.
Advertise your product or brand here
contact www.OpenSubtitles.org today
narrator: 150 miles north is
Heavy hauler jack jessee...
[honking horn]
Just entering a set of dips like
Nothing else on earth.
jack: Okay, so we're dropping
Down into the roller coaster.
narrator: These are the
Treacherous coils of ice called
"the roller coaster."
[rumbling, rattling]
jack: Oh, you're [bleep] me.
narrator: Just ahead, a
Trucker is in serious trouble.
jack: I've seen more than one
Guy slide backwards on this
Hill.
narrator: The truck spun out
In front of jack, making it
Easier for him to do the same.
When tires spin out on the ice
They act like polishing wheels,
Making the surface even slicker
For the next truck that comes
Along.
jack: Something I call...you
Know, we all call "breaking
Loose" up here, or "wiping your
Feet."
But we're gonna get in his parts
Where he spun his tires.
I could easily spin mine and
Actually spin out in the same
Place, so I gotta be sure not to
Be in the same place that he
Was.
narrator: Jack slows down to
Make sure the driver's been
Rescued.
jack: Okay, thank you.
It may be him this trip
And it may be me the next trip.
narrator: But it cost him
Precious momentum for getting up
The hill.
Suddenly he loses traction.
[wheels squealing]
[rattling, clinking]
narrator: Then jack's tires
Start slipping...
With 32,000 pounds dragging him
Down.
jack: Most of our biggest
Fear would be sliding backwards,
'cause you have no control.
And then all of a sudden you
Start spinning your tires and
You stop, and instantaneously
You start sliding backwards.
And there ain't a thing you can
Do.
Just hold on for the ride, I
Guess.
well, I think we just
Broke loose.
narrator: Jack backs off the
Power to stop his wheels from
Spinning, then precisely
Feathers the throttle to keep
Just enough forward momentum.
narrator: He gives it all the
Power he dares, and his tires
Grip the ice just enough to keep
Climbing.
jack: Ah, this is easy.
We'll just nurse this truck
Right over the top.
narrator: And finally, he
Rounds the top of the roller
Coaster.
jack: [laughs]
narrator: But yet another
Terror of the haul road lies
Dead ahead...avalanche alley.
narrator: Day two of the ice
Road season.
High in the brooks mountain
Range a fresh new snow has
Created a whole new danger of
Avalanches.
reid: [laughs]
17 inches of new snow is what
I'm looking at.
[laughs]
Once the wind hits this stuff,
It's just going to turn into
Rock-hard avalanches.
narrator: At 4,700 feet,
Atigun pass is both the midpoint
And highest reach of the haul
Road...the "avalanche alley" of
The north.
reid: If we did not shoot
This snow down, very likely
There would be trucks hit and
Trapped and maybe even knocked
Over the guard rail and down
Into the canyon.
narrator: Avalanche control
Expert reid bahnson and his crew
Set out to defuse the danger
With a very big gun.
The weapon is a korean war era
Recoilless rifle.
It fires shells packed with
8 pounds of tnt.
Conditions: A near whiteout.
reid: Uh, with the lack of
Visibility we have today, we're
Going to have to blind-fire the
Weapon.
If we get a break we'll use the
Sight.
It's a lot more fun.
Is the road closed?
man: Road's closed.
reid: Clear to the front?
man: Clear the rear!
reid: Ready to load shot 305.
reid: All clear.
Ready to fire.
Fire!
narrator: The rifle has no
Recoil because it vents the
Explosion out the rear of the
Gun in a ball of flame.
reid: Loaded.
Fire!
narrator: When the shell
Hits, the tnt detonates.
reid: Report.
narrator: And invisible in
The whiteout, a tsunami of snow
Rumbles down the mountain.
reid: All clear.
Ready to fire.
Fire!
[shouting]
Report.
[booming, rumbling]
We're good.
We caused three pretty
Good-sized avalanches.
narrator: With three big
Slides down, the pass can reopen
And the big rigs can get
Through.
But the danger is far from over
On the haul road.
Like wrecks and breakdowns,
Avalanches are inevitable.
In fairbanks, rookie tim freeman
Gets his first chance to drive
The haul road, provided he runs
With his mentor and family
Friend george spears.
tim jr.: Yeah, I'm nervous
About running up there.
Uh, there's lots of hazards in
The way.
I'm most nervous about the
Hills.
[beeping]
[honks horn]
narrator: George is hauling
13 tons of thermasteel panels...
Enough to build five
Heat-efficient houses for the
Oil workers in prudhoe bay.
Behind him, tim pulls a typical
Rookie load...25,000 pounds of
Canned food...which is difficult
To damage.
tim jr.: Heading to prudhoe
For my first trip.
It's something I've been waiting
To do since I started driving
The truck.
tim jr.: All right, george.
No sweat.
narrator: Tim first has to
Navigate a 75-mile stretch of
Icy curves before the pavement
Ends and the dalton itself
Begins.
george: Pretty steep grade
Along here.
If it doesn't get you spinning
Out going up the hill, you're
Sliding off the other side,
So...
tim jr.: Eh, it's a son of a
Bitch, that hill.
I think I just slipped a little
Bit on that last hill.
narrator: Tim feels the rear
End of his truck losing contact
With the road, which is usually
The last feeling a driver gets
Before he goes off the edge.
Back in fairbanks, hugh rowland
Reports to carlile
Transportation to take on
America's ice road.
hugh: They say she's a road
From hell, so I'm here to give
Her a shot.
Take a little american money
Home with me.
narrator: On the canadian ice
Roads, he's the one and only
Polar bear.
First in hauling freight.
First in money-making.
Last in humility.
hugh: Walk tall.
Carry a big stick.
The ice road trucker with the
Bigger stick wins.
narrator: But on american
Soil, the polar bear is just
Another rookie.
But before he can be trusted in
The alaskan wilderness, he has
To prove himself on a video
Game.
roberta: So this is a
Simulator.
We're gonna get this cranked up
And, uh, let you, uh, see what
It's like to drive the alaska
Roads.
All right? So if I can get you
To put your seatbelt on, and
Whenever you're comfortable, go
Ahead and start it up and let's
Roll.
[suspenseful music]
♪ ♪
hugh: Away we go.
Nobody coming through the
Intersection.
[gearshift grinding]
narrator: The instructor
Tests hugh's driving skills on
Varying terrain and how quickly
He can react to sudden
Obstacles.
hugh: [chuckles]
I tipped it over.
roberta: You did tip it over.
hugh: Roberta's probably
Messing with the storms out
There.
roberta: I blew out your, um,
Left steer tire.
You...you noticed.
You had your trailer swinging
Back and forth.
narrator: Hugh narrowly
Passes the exam.
He walks away from this wreck,
But if this happens on the
Dalton, he might not be so
Lucky.
230 miles north is the shelf, a
Narrow, high-walled passage cut
Into the mountainside...
Notorious for causing rollovers
And head-ons.
It's dangerous for any two
Trucks to meet here, and jack
Jessee approaches it with the
Widest load on the road...
An 18-foot modular.
man on radio: There you go.
Go smooth, uh...
A lot of southbounds are
Starting your way, coming
Awfully fast.
jack, you copy?
We got a load of
Southbounders...
it's too dangerous over your
Pass.
I don't think you've got
Enough room to get through that
Up there.
narrator: Oncoming trucks
Clear his rig with as little as
6 inches to spare.
jack: A little snug, there,
Wasn't it, dawg?
narrator: But there's an even
More dangerous stretch just 50
Miles ahead at 4,700-foot
Atigun pass.
jack: What, is it starting to
Blow or something?
narrator: When high winds
Blow through this terrain,
Avalanches follow.
jack: What happened up there?
Avalanche or are they just
Cleaning the road?
yeah, an avalanche.
I don't think that you'll be
Able to fit between there.
It was up higher than my truck.
jack: When did that avalanche
Happen?
Just a little bit ago?
must have.
Looked pretty fresh.
narrator: Minutes ago, an
Avalanche tore down the pass
And buried the road ahead in 12
Feet of snow.
jack, you copy, we need to
Hang out here in the chain-up
Area.
State's getting it cleared out.
It's too narrow for us to get
Through there right now.
jack: Oh, lovely.
narrator: Jack narrowly
Escaped being buried.
He pulls over to wait for the
Plows to clear the way.
Every minute the load waits, an
Oil rig crew sits idle.
Yet jack still faces the heart
Of alaska's avalanche alley.
jack: I don't know if I even
Want to go up there, you know.
When one avalanche falls,
There's a good chance there's
Gonna be more of 'em.
narrator: On 4,700-foot
Atigun pass, the highest
Point of the dalton, the road
Suddenly disappeared under a
12-foot wave of snow.
Heavy hauler jack jessee and
His convoy just missed getting
Hit by the avalanche.
Then they were delayed for two
Hours by the cleanup, losing
Money as the load stands idle.
Finally, some good news.
yes, you're good to go now.
Jack, you got a copy there?
jack: Okay, I'm moving.
Well, anyway, they got the
Avalanche cleared enough for
Me to go through.
Oh, it's right here's where the
Avalanche was, you know?
That'll stop a truck.
Okay, guys, watch out for any
More avalanches here.
We don't want to get caught in
One today.
all right, here we come.
jack: So we've made it up and
Over the pass, through the
Avalanche and down the other
Side.
narrator: After the pass,
The road descends to the open
Tundra of the north slope.
Here there's yet another
Prevailing danger.
jack: Mother nature's
Starting to pick her...pick her
Fury back up again, up north.
narrator: The high winds of
The polar region blast across
The ice without a tree or a
Mountain to slow them down,
Hitting a big, square load
Like jack's with terrifying
Force.
jack: It could just, you
Know, blow the truck sideways.
And, uh, you know, push me off
The road.
narrator: One of the most
Dreaded hazards of the haul road
Is a whiteout...what alaskans
Call a blow, and jack has just
Driven into a blinding, howling
Blow.
These conditions cause head-on
Collisions, or you can drive
Off the road without knowing it
And be buried alive by the snow.
jack: And your motor's
Gonna plug up, your air
Cleaner's gonna plug up,
Your motor's gonna die.
You're out here so far in such
Bad weather that nobody's really
Gonna be able to get to you.
narrator: Phase three means
It's too dangerous for even
Emergency crews.
Truckers are now completely on
Their own.
Back at carlile, alex
Debogorski gets ready for his
First alaskan challenge.
alex: I've never really been
Tested by somebody.
I got my license out of a
Popcorn box years ago.
narrator: Last year, his
Run was cut short when he was
Suddenly stricken with heart
Trouble.
This year, he's setting out to
Make a comeback on a road even
More dangerous than the last.
yeah, I think alex
Has something to prove to
Himself, not only to anybody
Else.
He's back.
He's...he's full of piss and
Vinegar.
He's gonna get at 'er.
narrator: To pursue
Alaska's big paycheck, alex
Left his family of 11 children
And 9 grandchildren behind
In yellowknife, canada.
alex: You gotta die sometime.
yeah, but I don't want
You to go on the ice road.
he's never driven this road
Before, and we hear it's quite
A dangerous road.
And, of course, I always worry
About his health, but we're just
Gonna pray that everything
Goes well, and god always
Looks after us.
alex: Give us direction and
Guidance, protect us from evil
And harm.
narrator: With his family's
Blessing, alex is a rookie all
Over again, but can he make it
Through five minutes on the haul
Road simulator?
alex: Whoa.
Run over the lawn.
narrator: He's off to a bad
Start.
alex: I started off with
The truck being turned all the
Way to the right, and so when
I put it in gear, the truck
Just sort of drove right up on
The lawn, and so I ran over
About an acre of lawn before I
Got back down on the road.
narrator: Getting out of
Town is the biggest hurdle.
[horn honks]
alex: Get your ass out of
The way, okay?
narrator: On the snowy
Curves of the dalton,
Alex excels.
there you go, perfect.
narrator: And passes like a
Pro.
alex: It made me seasick,
And you just gotta drive this...
This thing all over the place.
But it went all right.
good job.
[alex laughs]
narrator: 50 miles north of
Fairbanks is rookie tim
Freeman, who's having trouble
With his truck's rear end.
tim: I'm just trying to
Concentrate on this to see if
It'll do it again.
narrator: The drive wheels
Of his cab are hopping off the
Road and skidding sideways,
And he's still on the pavement.
tim: I'm feeling hot.
Yeah, just get it back there.
It hopped.
narrator: The rear end was
Just rebuilt on the truck, and
Either the mechanic made a
Mistake or tim's got a bad
Case of rookie nerves.
tim: I'd like to get one...
One more good pull to make sure
I'm not imagining this.
narrator: Either way, his
Mentor and lead driver george
Spears is not taking a chance
On tim's safety.
tim: Yeah, something's
Jumping back there, george.
[bleep]
narrator: Eight miles from
The dalton and his dream of
Driving the haul road, tim
Decides that his truck is
Dangerously unfit for the trip.
tim: Yeah, I'm bummed about
It.
I'm finally up here and doing
It and...Now I have to go back
To town.
Won't even make it to the
Dalton highway.
This sucks.
george: I know it.
Those guys from minnesota, man,
They're rough on equipment,
Aren't they?
[tim laughs]
Okay, buddy.
tim: All right, george.
nice...it was nice working
With you.
[tim laughs]
I sure hope they fire you
When you get back to town.
[tim laughs]
narrator: George spears
Will have to continue north by
Himself while tim abandons his
Load and turns back for
Fairbanks.
tim: I'm gonna turn around
And drop this trailer here and
Bring her back to town and get
Her fixed and drive her
Another day.
narrator: 62 miles south of
Prudhoe bay and the entrance to
The ice road, jack jessee is
Trapped by bad weather.
Just up the road is a phase
Three whiteout, conditions so
Extreme that emergency crews
Can't drive, much less jack and
His high priority load.
He's parked on the open tundra
Until the wind dies down,
Which can take days and cause
Him to miss his deadline.
[tapping]
jack: No horsing around here.
We got work to do.
Just gonna hunker in and sit
This one out, so there's no
Need for us to go in and get
Into that mess.
can't see 10 feet between
Us to begin with.
jack: Yeah, pretty well
Stuck here.
see you in the morning.
We'll figure it out then.
narrator: As day two of the
Ice road season comes to an end,
So does a rookie's first attempt
At driving the haul road.
tim: I called my dad right
Before we pulled out of the yard
And asked him for any
Last-minute advice.
He said, "don't [bleep] up."
[laughs]
narrator: Tim freeman
Returns to the carlile yard
In fairbanks, defeated.
tim: Hey, dad, what's
Happening?
narrator: As he breaks the
News to his father, he wonders
If he made the right call or
Possibly caved under pressure.
well, sure, yeah, absolutely
There's pressure on you.
If you screw up, you're gonna
Hear about it for a long time,
So you don't want to screw up.
tim: Yep.
be a professional when
You're behind the wheel.
tim: All right, dad.
I'll talk to you tomorrow, then.
Good night.
narrator: Turning back on
Your first run is bad enough,
But 225 miles north, on the
Shelf, another rookie's trip
Comes to a far worse end.
some tanker went off the
Road up there.
oh, there he is.
narrator: Rescuers rush to
The scene...And arrive braced
For the worst.
[grunts]
You all right?
yeah, I'm okay.
not hurt or anything?
We can have the medical check
You out if you want to go up
To pump four.
no, I'm all right.
okay.
narrator: The driver, bruce
Carl, is shaken but manages to
Climb out of the wreck.
He's got years of trucking
Experience, but this was his
First attempt on the ice.
you know it hurts your pride.
There's no way around that.
I know I made a mistake.
narrator: One mistake on
This road is all it takes.
I reached up to grab
Something off the dash, and I
Got too close to the edge.
narrator: In the instant that
Bruce reached over, his front
Right wheel caught the edge of
The road.
The whole truck followed as it
Flipped onto its side and slid
Into the ditch.
I wasn't goin' but about 25
Mile an hour, but once it
Grabbed and started, I couldn't
Stop it.
This road is no joke.
It can get you, and today was
My day.
narrator: Prudhoe bay,
Alaska.
Land's end...But the beginning
Of the arctic ice road for jack
Jessee.
In the 500 miles from fairbanks,
The most dangerous road in
North america threw everything
It had at jack.
He just missed getting hit by
An avalanche, then was stranded
In a massive whiteout.
But now comes the danger that
Deeply haunts every driver...the
Possibility of breaking
Through the ice.
36 miles northwest of prudhoe,
Jack arrives at the oil field
Operated by the italian company
Known as eni.
jack: This is just about...
It's one of the most northern
Parts you can actually drive to.
This oil rig we're rolling to
Right here is actually just...
It's right on the sea, the
Arctic sea up here.
narrator: He eases his rig
Onto the ice road.
The arctic ice cracks as it
Flexes with the weight of jack's
Truck.
jack: It's got really big
Cracks in it because ice
Changes with the temperature.
The colder it gets, the ice
Shrinks more and actually
Creates its own cracks that
Way.
narrator: With 48 hours and
Almost 600 white-knuckle miles
Behind him, jack arrives on time
At the oil rig.
[horn honks]
jack: Here we are...
60 miles west and north of
Prudhoe bay right now, out in
The middle of the oil field.
If the oil industry wasn't up
Here, digging holes in the
Ground, trying to find oil,
You know, the dalton highway
Wouldn't be there, my job
Wouldn't be there, you know, and
I wouldn't...wouldn't have the
Experiences up on this road that
I have.
It's one of the most amazing
Views I've ever seen.
Yeah, it's been a great
Experience for me.
Support us and become VIP member
to remove all ads from www.OpenSubtitles.org